This lecture is about
interpreting your results.
Because data analysis is an iterative
process, interpretation is actually
something that happens continuously
throughout the whole process.
But because it's so important,
it deserves a separate discussion.
Interpretation in the data analysis is
a continuous part of the entire data
analysis process.
And just like with other
aspects of data analysis,
everything you do is based on setting
expectations and kind of matching the data
that you collect with the information
that you collect to those expectations.
Now the expectations for your
interpretation will be based on things
like exploratory data analysis and
formal modelling.
Now when the interpretation does
not match your expectations,
that you're gonna have to figure
out whether it's because your
expectations were incorrect or
because your interpretation is incorrect.
And so figuring that out is part of
the iterative nature of interpretation.
And even though this is one of
the last steps of any data analysis,
you may need to go back to
the exploratory data analysis or
the formal modeling stages if
the things that you've discover
in your interpretation challenge
what you found previously.
So there are a couple of basic principles
to keep in mind when interpreting results,
particularly in the later
stages of a data analysis.
The first thing you're probably gonna
wanna do is to revisit your question,
and just to kinda make sure that you
haven't gone off course from your
original question.
The second thing you wanna think
about is your primary results.
So typically in a formal modelling,
you'll have a primary model and
maybe some secondary models.
Particularly in an inferential or
causal type of question.
And so the primary result will be
kind of initially what you focus on.
It may not be the last thing
that you focus on, but
it'll be what you initially focus on.
And there are three things that you wanna
think about with your primary result.
That's the directionality,
the magnitude, and the uncertainty.
And we'll talk more
about this in a second.
But those are kind of the three properties
of any result that you're gonna
wanna think about.
Then there's the context.
The context is important because it
really takes into account the totality
of the evidence that you've developed
through both primary and secondary models.
And when you look at the kind of totality
of the evidence, you wanna look separately
at the direction, magnitude, uncertainty
of all the different models that you fit.
And of course, you wanna join this
with everything that's already known
about the question you're asking,
either from literature or
from other colleagues
in your organization.
Last thing you wanna think about is
the implications, so you wanna consider
the implications of your analysis and how
they might determine what actions to take.
And it should be,
any actions that might be taken that are
a result of the answer to your question.
So that the implication is kind of
the last step of interpretation.
So revisiting the question is really
important because often in a long and
complicated data analysis, it's easy to go
off course or kinda go off on a tangent
while you're looking at
interesting things in your data.
This can happen either in
the exploratory data analysis process or
in the formal modeling phase.
And so
it's important to kinda either get back
onto track with your original question.
Or if you divert it onto a different or
perhaps more interesting question
to recognize that fact that you're
looking at something different.
So you may pursue other
important findings, that's okay,
but it's important to just realize
what question you're actually asking.
So because if your former modelling ends
up answering a different question and
perhaps the modeling approach doesn't
exactly match what the question was,
then you might have a problem
with interpretation later on.
So revisiting the question
is really important for
just setting your expectation for
what you will find in your results.
It's also useful to kind of
remind yourself of what type
of question you're trying to ask,
whether it was descriptive, exploratory,
inferential, predictive,
causal, or mechanistic.
Just to remind yourself of the kind
of nature of the question, and to
make sure that the analysis that you did
matched the question that you were asking.
So, most of what I'm gonna
talk about in this lecture
really pertains to inferential or
kinda causal questions,
where the interpretation
can be very challenging.
So, the other thing you wanna think about
as you reconsider your question is check
for potential bias in your results.
So, given a certain type of question,
you will have a population
that question applies to.
You'll have a sampling process that you
should be able to describe as part of your
kind of data analysis process.
And it's useful to think about whether or
not that sampling process accurately
represents the population or whether there
may be some bias in terms of who you
selected into your dataset and
who exactly they represent.
So once you've got your primary model,
this is based on exploratory data analysis
and kind of formal modeling,
you're gonna have a primary result.
And the three things that you wanna
think about are the directionality
of the result, the magnitude,
and the uncertainty.
So directionality really pertains,
I think, to inferential and
causal types of questions where you
try to estimate some association and
the association can either be positive,
negative, or zero.
Now, so positive or
negative is what we're talking about
when we talk about directionality.
And that's a very easy thing to check.
If you were expecting
a positive association,
then you can see whether
the result is positive.
And likewise,
if you were expecting something negative,
you can see whether
the result was negative.
So that quick check on directionality
is a useful kind of quick check for
seeing whether your results
kinda match your expectations.
The next thing, once you've solved
the directionality issue is the magnitude.
So the magnitude is really
the size of the association or
the size of the effect that you estimate.
And the question you wanna ask is
does that magnitude make sense?
Is it meaningful to you?
And what would be the impact
on the population
of having an effect of this size or
if the association was of this size?
So who would be affected is
an important question when
you kind of think about the magnitude and
whether it's meaningful to you or not.
The last thing of course,
you wanna think about is the uncertainty.
At this phase it's important that
you focus on continuous measures of
uncertainty and
not kind of binary measures of yes,
no's or statistical significance or not.
Things like confidence intervals and
other measures that can give you a sense
of the range of possibilities and
kinda be magnitude of the uncertainty in
your estimate are useful at this phase,
before you start making decisions
about what to do or what not to do.
So the directionality,
magnitude, and uncertainty,
are the key things to look at when
you've got your primary model results.
Now in addition to primary model results,
you'll have a lot of secondary
model sensitivity analyses,
other things that you tried.
And this will kinda make up the totality
of the evidence for your analysis.
And so you're gonna wanna think
about each of these primary and
secondary models, in the context of the
three's factors that we just talked about,
which are directionality,
magnitude, and uncertainty,
kind of roughly in that order.
So, when you look across all of
the evidence that you generated,
how is the directionality preserved,
or not.
How is the magnitude of the effect or
the association preserved, or not.
And how is the uncertainty about
your estimate preserved or not?
How does those change from model to model?
If the directionality changes then that
may call into question whether you've
got a reasonable modeling strategy or
if even that association actually
exists in the population.
If the magnitude changes
that may indicate you've got
a potential confounding going on, or
maybe you've got to think about what
type of model is the best model for
estimating this type of association.
And similarly, if the uncertainty
blows up when you add certain
factors into your model, then that will
indicate to you that maybe you don't have
a very good estimate of an association or
an effect in the population.
And finally of course, included with the
totality of the evidence, is the kind of
any results they may already be existing
that people have researched before.
People, either in the literature or
in your organization,
that people already know about.
And you wanna know how your results,
along with kind of
the evidence that you've generated, are
consistent or not with existing results.
Finally, it's important to think about
the implications of your analysis.
So many analyses are done to
ultimately inform a decision.
And so any kind of positive findings that
you find that match your expectations may
require some follow up before
it ultimately decision is made.
So sometimes with inferential questions
where you're just looking for
an association, if the association is of
interest that meant you evolved into kind
of asking a more causal question where
you may need to design a different
kind of study, maybe an intervention,
or a controlled trial.
So that may be the decision that
results from your analysis.
But the ultimate decision and
how much evidence is needed to
inform that decision will
depend on the stakeholders of
the analysis of who asked for
the analysis, who is being informed by it,
and kind of what their cost benefits and
what their kind of values are.
And so, different groups of people
will interpret evidence differently,
not because of their
interpreting it incorrectly but
rather their decision to act on evidence
will based on a variety of factors that
are really outside the dataset and
are not really part of the analysis.
So it's important to always keep in
mind the ultimate goal of the analysis,
the decision that might need to be made,
and the stakeholders who are involved in
making those decisions and what kinds
of factors they need to consider.
So, just to summarize,
when it comes to interpreting results,
you wanna always revisit the question,
make sure you know what question you're
asking and what type of question it is, so
that you can figure out whether
the analysis matched the question.
Think about your primary result,
and for that result,
you wanna consider the direction,
the magnitude, and the uncertainty.
There's gonna be many
results that you generate, so
you wanna think about
the totality of the evidence.
So this is the context
that we're talking about.
And for each of the kind of results that
you generate, you similarly wanna think
about the direction, magnitude,
and uncertainty of those results.
And you wanna combine this evidence that
you've generated with existing knowledge.
Finally, the implications of analysis
are always important to consider.
And you wanna think about how the evidence
that you generate will inform the next
steps, or any decisions that
might be made afterwards.